CHAPTER I

THE PERFECT BOARDING HOUSE


It is queer, but Captain Cy himself doesn't remember whether the
day was Tuesday or Wednesday. Asaph Tidditt's records ought to
settle it, for there was a meeting of the board of selectmen that
day, and Asaph has been town clerk in Bayport since the summer
before the Baptist meeting house burned. But on the record the
date, in Asaph's handwriting, stands "Tuesday, May 10, 189-" and,
as it happens, May 10 of that year fell on Wednesday, not Tuesday
at all.

Keturah Bangs, who keeps "the perfect boarding house," says it was
Tuesday, because she remembers they had fried cod cheeks and
cabbage that day--as they have every Tuesday--and neither Mr.
Tidditt nor Bailey Bangs, Keturah's husband, was on hand when the
dinner bell rang. Keturah says she is certain it was Tuesday,
because she remembers smelling the boiled cabbage as she stood at
the side door, looking up the road to see if either Asaph or Bailey
was coming. As for Bailey, he says he remembers being late to
dinner and his wife's "startin' to heave a broadsides into him"
because of it, but he doesn't remember what day it was. This isn't
surprising; Keturah's verbal cannonades are likely to make one
forgetful of trifles.

At any rate, whether Tuesday or Wednesday, it is certain that it
was quarter past twelve, according to the clock presented to the
Methodist Society by the Honorable Heman Atkins, when Asaph Tidditt
came down the steps of the townhall, after the selectmen's meeting,
and saw Bailey Bangs waiting for him on the opposite side of the
road.

"Hello, Ase!" hailed Mr. Bangs. "You'll be late to dinner, if you
don't hurry. I was headin' for home, all sail sot, when I see you.
What kept you?"

"Town business, of course," replied Mr. Tidditt, with the
importance pertaining to his official position. "What kept YOU,
for the land sakes? Won't Ketury be in your wool?"

Bailey hasn't any "wool" worth mentioning now, and he had very
little more then, but he mopped his forehead, or the extension
above it, taking off his cap to do so.

"I cal'late she will," he said, uneasily. "Tell you the truth,
Ase, I was up to the store, and Cap'n Josiah Dimick and some more
of 'em drifted in and we got talkin' about the chances of the
harbor appropriation, and one thing or 'nother, and 'twas later'n
I thought 'twas 'fore I knew it."

The appropriation from the government, which was to deepen and
widen our harbor here at Bayport, was a very vital topic among us
just then. Heman Atkins, the congressman from our district, had
promised to do his best for the appropriation, and had for a time
been very sanguine of securing it. Recently, however, he had not
been quite as hopeful.

"What's Cap'n Josiah think about the chances?" asked Asaph eagerly.

"Well, sometimes he thinks 'Yes' and then again he thinks 'No,'"
replied Bailey. "He says, of course, if Heman is able to get it he
will, but if he ain't able to, he--he--"

"He won't, I s'pose. Well, _I_ can think that myself, and I don't
set up to be no inspired know-it-all, like Joe Dimick. He ain't
heard from Heman lately, has he?"

"No, he ain't. Neither's anybody else, so fur as I can find out."

"Oh, yes, they have. _I_ have, for one."

Mr. Bangs stopped short in his double-quick march for home and
dinner, and looked his companion in the face.

"Ase Tidditt!" he cried. "Do you mean to tell me you've had a
letter from Heman Atkins, from Washin'ton?"

Asaph nodded portentously.

"Yes, sir," he declared. "A letter from the Honorable Heman G.
Atkins, of Washin'ton, D. C., come to me last night. I read it
afore I turned in."

"You did! And never said nothin' about it?"

"Why should I say anything about it? 'Twas addressed to me as town
clerk, and was concernin' a matter to be took up with the board of
s'lectmen. I ain't in the habit of hollerin' town affairs through
a speakin' trumpet. Folks that vote for me town-meetin' day know
that, I guess. Angie Phinney says to me only yesterday, 'Mr.
Tidditt,' says she, 'there's one thing I'll say for you--you don't
talk.'"

Miss Phinney boarded with the Bangses, and Bailey was acquainted
with her personal peculiarities; for that matter so were most of
Bayport's permanent residents.

"Humph!" he snorted indignantly. "She thought 'twas a good thing
not to talk, hey? SHE did? Well, by mighty! you never get no
CHANCE to talk when she's around. Angie Phinney! Why, when that
poll parrot of hers died, Alph'us Smalley declared up and down that
what killed it was jealousy and disapp'inted ambition; he said it
broke its heart tryin' to keep up with Angie. Her ma was the same
breed of cats. I remember--"

The talking proclivities of females is the one topic upon which
Keturah's husband is touchiest. Asaph knew this, but he delighted
to stir up his chum occasionally. He chuckled as he interrupted
the flow of reminiscence.

"There, there, Bailey!" he exclaimed. "I know as much about
Angie's tribe as you do, I cal'late. Ain't we a little mite off
the course? Seems to me we was talkin' about Heman's letter."

"Is that so? I judged from what you said we wa'n't goin' to talk
about it. Aw, don't be so mean, Ase! Showin' off your importance
like a young one! What did Heman say about the appropriation? Is
he goin' to get it?"

Mr. Tidditt paused before replying. Then, bending over, he
whispered in his chum's ear:

"He never said one word about the appropriation, Bailey; not one
word. He wanted to know if we'd got this year's taxes on the
Whittaker place. And, if we hadn't, what was we goin' to do about
it? Bailey, between you and me and the mizzenmast, Heman Atkins
wants to get ahold of that place the worst way."

"He does? He DOES? For the land sakes, ain't he got property
enough already? Ain't a--a palace like that enough for one man,
without wantin' to buy a rattletrap like THAT?"

The first "that" was emphasized by a brandished but reverent left
hand; the second by a derisively pointing right. The two friends
had reached the crest of the long slope leading up from the
townhall. On one side of the road stretched the imposing frontage
of the "Atkins estate," with its iron fence and stone posts; on the
other slouched the weed-grown, tumble-down desolation of the "Cy
Whittaker place." The contrast was that of opulent prosperity and
poverty-stricken neglect.

If our village boasted one of those horseless juggernauts, such as
are used to carry sightseers in Boston from the old North Church to
the Public Library and other points of interest--that is, if there
was a "seeing Bayport" car, it is from this hill that its occupants
would be given their finest view of the village and its surroundings.
As Captain Josiah Dimick always says: "Bayport is all north and
south, like a codfish line. It puts me in mind of Seth Higgins's
oldest boy. He was so tall and thin that when they bought a suit of
clothes for him, they used to take reefs in the sides of the jacket
and use the cloth to piece onto the bottoms of the trousers' legs."
What Captain Joe means is that the houses in the village are all
built beside three roads running longitudinally. There is the
"main road" and the "upper road"--or "Woodchuck Lane," just as you
prefer--and the "lower road," otherwise known as "Bassett's Holler."

The "upper road" is sometimes called the "depot road," because the
railroad station is conveniently located thereon--convenient for
the railroad, that is--the station being a full mile from Simmons's
"general store," which is considered the center of the town. The
upper road enters the main road at the corner by the store, and
there also are the Methodist meetinghouse and the schoolhouse. The
townhall is in the hollow farther on. Then comes the big hill--
"Whittaker's Hill"--and from the top of this hill you can, on a
clear day, see for miles across the salt marshes and over the bay
to the eastward, and west as far as the church steeple in Orham.
If there happens to be a fog, with a strong easterly wind, you
cannot see the marshes or the bay, but you can smell them, wet and
salty and sweet. It is a smell that the born Bayporter never
forgets, but carries with him in memory wherever he goes; and that,
in the palmy days of the merchant marine, was likely, to be far,
for every male baby in the village was born with web feet, so
people said, and was predestined to be a sailor.

When Heman Atkins came back from the South Seas early in the '60's,
"rich as dock mud," though still a young man, he promptly tore down
his father's old house, which stood on the crest of Whittaker's
Hill, and built in its place a big imposing residence. It was by
far the finest house in Bayport, and Heman made it finer as the
years passed. There were imitation brownstone pillars supporting
its front porch, iron dogs and scroll work iron benches bordering
its front walk, and a pair of stone urns, in summer filled with
flowers, beside its big iron front gate.

Heman was our leading citizen, our representative in Washington,
and the town's philanthropist. He gave the Atkins memorial window
and the Atkins tower clock to the Methodist Church. The Atkins
town pump, also his gift, stood before the townhall. The Atkins
portrait in the Bayport Ladies' Library was much admired; and the
size of the Atkins fortune was the principal subject of conversation
at sewing circle, at the table of "the perfect boarding house,"
around the stove in Simmons's store, or wherever Bayporters were
used to gather. We never exactly worshipped Heman Atkins, perhaps,
but we figuratively doffed our hats when his name was mentioned.

The "Cy Whittaker place" faced the Atkins estate from the opposite
side of the main road, but it was the general opinion that it ought
to be ashamed to face it. Almost everybody called it "the Cy
Whittaker place," although some of the younger set spoke of it as
the "Sea Sight House." It was a big, old-fashioned dwelling,
gambrel-roofed and brown and dilapidated. Originally it had
enjoyed the dignified seclusion afforded by a white picket fence
with square gateposts, and the path to its seldom-used front door
had been guarded by rigid lines of box hedge. This, however, was
years ago, before the second Captain Cy Whittaker died, and before
the Howes family turned it into the "Sea Sight House," a hotel for
summer boarders.

The Howeses "improved" the house and grounds. They tore down the
picket fence, uprooted the box hedges, hung a sign over the sacred
front door, and built a wide veranda under the parlor windows.

They took boarders for five consecutive summers; then they gave up
the unprofitable undertaking, returned to Concord, New Hampshire,
their native city, and left the Cy Whittaker place to bear the
ravages of Bayport winters and Bayport small boys as best it might.

For years it stood empty. The weeds grew high about its foundations;
the sparrows built nests behind such of its shutters as had not been
ripped from their hinges by February no'theasters; its roof grew
bald in spots as the shingles loosened and were blown away; the
swallows flew in and out of its stone-broken windowpanes. Year by
year it became more of a disgrace in the eyes of Bayport's neat and
thrifty inhabitants--for neat and thrifty we are, if we do say it.
The selectmen would have liked to tear it down, but they could not,
because it was private property, having been purchased from the
Howes heirs by the third Cy Whittaker, Captain Cy's only son, who
ran away to sea when he was sixteen years old, and was disinherited
and cast off by the proud old skipper in consequence. Each March,
Asaph Tidditt, in his official capacity as town clerk, had been
accustomed to receive an envelope with a South American postmark,
and in that envelope was a draft on a Boston banking house for the
sum due as taxes on the "Cy Whittaker place." The drafts were
signed "Cyrus M. Whittaker."

But this particular year--the year in which this chronicle begins--
no draft had been received. Asaph waited a few weeks and then
wrote to the address indicated by the postmark. His letter was
unanswered. The taxes were due in March and it was now May. Mr.
Tidditt wrote again; then he laid the case before the board of
selectmen, and Captain Eben Salters, chairman of that august body,
also wrote. But even Captain Eben's authoritative demand was
ignored. Next to the harbor appropriation, the question of what
should be done about the "Cy Whittaker place" filled Bayport's
thoughts that spring. No one, however, had supposed that the
Honorable Heman might wish to buy it. Bailey Bangs's surprise was
excusable.

"What in the world," repeated Bailey, "does Heman want of a shebang
like that? Ain't he got enough already?"

His friend shook his head.

"'Pears not," he said. "I judge it's this way, Bailey: Heman, he's
a proud man--"

"Well, ain't he got a right to be proud?" broke in Mr. Bangs,
hastening to resent any criticism of the popular idol. "Cal'late
you and me'd be proud if we was able to carry as much sail as he
does, wouldn't we?"

"Yes, I guess like we would. But you needn't get red in the face
and strain your biler just because I said that. I ain't finding
fault with Heman; I'm only tellin' you. He's proud, as I said, and
his wife--"

"She's dead this four year. What are you resurrectin' her for?"

"Land! you're peppery as a West Injy omelet this mornin'. Let me
alone till I've finished. His wife, when she was alive, she was
proud, too. And his daughter, Alicia, she's eight year old now,
and by and by she'll be grown up into a high-toned young woman.
Well, Heman is fur-sighted, and I s'pose likely he's thinkin' of
the days when there'll be young rich fellers--senators and--and--
well, counts and lords, maybe--cruisin' down here courtin' her. By
that time the Whittaker place'll be a worse disgrace than 'tis now.
I presume he don't want those swells to sit on his front piazza and
see the crows buildin' nests in the ruins acrost the road. So--"

"Crows! Did you ever see a crow build a nest in a house? I never
did!"

"Oh, belay! Crows or canary birds, what difference does it make?
SOMETHIN' 'll nest there, if it's only A'nt Sophrony Hallett's
hens. So Heman he writes to the board, askin' if the taxes is
paid, if we've heard any reason why they ain't paid, and what we're
goin' to do about it. If there's a sale for taxes he wants to be
fust bidder. Then, when the place is his, he can tear down or
rebuild, just as he sees fit. See?"

"Yes, I see. Well, I feel about that the way Joe Dimick felt when
he heard the doctor had told Elviry Pepper she must stop singin' in
the choir or lose her voice altogether. 'Whichever happens 'll be
an improvement,' says Cap'n Joe; and whatever Heman does 'll help
the Whittaker place. What did you decide at the meetin'?"

"Nothin'. We can't decide yet. We ain't sure about the law and we
want to wait a spell, anyhow. But I know how 'twill end: Atkins
'll get the place. He always gets what he wants, Heman does."

Bailey turned and looked back at the old house, forlorn amidst its
huddle of blackberry briers and weeds, and with the ubiquitous
"silver-leaf" saplings springing up in clusters everywhere about it
and closing in on its defenseless walls like squads of victorious
soldiery making the final charge upon a conquered fort.

"Well," sighed Mr. Bangs, "so that 'll be the end of the old
Whittaker place, hey? Sho! things change in a feller's lifetime,
don't they? You and me can remember, Ase, when Cap'n Cy Whittaker
was one of the biggest men we had in this town. So was his dad
afore him, the Cap'n Cy that built the house. I wonder the looks
of things here now don't bring them two up out of their graves. Do
you remember young Cy--'Whit' we used to call him--or 'Reddy Whit,'
'count of his red hair? I don't know's you do, though; guess you'd
gone to sea when he run away from home."

Mr. Tidditt shook his head.

"No, no!" he said. "I was to home that year. Remember 'Whit'?
Well, I should say I did. He was a holy terror--yes, sir! Wan't
no monkey shines or didos cut up in this town that young Cy wan't
into. Fur's that goes, you and me was in 'em, too, Bailey. We was
all holy terrors then. Young ones nowadays ain't got the spunk we
used to have."

His friend chuckled.

"That's so," he declared. "That's so. Whit was a good-hearted
boy, too, but full of the Old Scratch and as sot in his ways as his
dad, and if Cap'n Cy wan't sot, then there ain't no sotness.
'You'll go to college and be a parson,' says the Cap'n. 'I'll go
to sea and be a sailor, same as you done,' says Whit. And he did,
too; run away one night, took the packet to Boston, and shipped
aboard an Australian clipper. Cap'n Cy didn't go after him to
fetch him home. No, sir--ee! not a fetch. Sent him a letter plumb
to Melbourne and, says he: 'You've made your bed; now lay in it.
Don't you never dast to come back to me or your ma,' he says. And
Whit didn't, he wan't that kind."

"Pretty nigh killed the old lady--Whit's ma--that did," mused
Asaph. "She died a little spell afterwards. And the old man pined
away, too, but he never give in or asked the boy to come back.
Stubborn as all get-out to the end, he was, and willed the place,
all he had left, to them Howes folks. And a nice mess THEY made of
it. Young Cy, he--"

"Young Cy!" interrupted Bailey. "We're always callin' him 'young
Cy,' and yet, when you come to think of it, he must be pretty nigh
fifty-five now; 'most as old as you and I be. Wonder if he'll ever
come back here."

"You bet he won't!" was the oracular reply. "You bet he won't!
From what I hear he got to be a sea cap'n himself and settled down
there in Buenos Ayres. He's made all kinds of money, they say, out
of hides and such. What he ever bought his dad's old place for,
_I_ can't see. He'll never come back to these common, one-horse
latitudes, now you mark my word on that!"

It was a prophecy Mr. Tidditt was accustomed to make each year to
the crowd at the post office, when the receipt for the draft for
taxes caused him to wax reminiscent. The younger generation here
in Bayport regard their town clerk as something of an oracle, and
this regard has made Asaph a trifle vain and positive.

Bailey chuckled again.

"We WAS a spunky, dare-devil lot in the old days, wan't we, Ase?"
he said. "Spunk was kind of born in us, as you might say. And
even now we're--"

The Atkins tower clock boomed once--a solemn, dignified stroke.
Mr. Tidditt and his companion started and looked at each other.

"Godfrey scissors!" gasped Asaph. "Is that half past twelve?"

Mr. Bangs pulled a big worn silver watch from his pocket and
glanced at the dial.

"It is!" he moaned. "As sure's you're born, it is! We've kept
Ketury's dinner waitin' twenty minutes. You and me are in for it
now, Ase Tidditt! Twenty minutes late! She'll skin us alive."

Mr. Tidditt did not pause to answer, but plunged headlong down the
hill at a race-horse gait, Bailey pounding at his heels. For "born
dare-devils," self-confessed, they were a nervous and apprehensive
pair.

The "perfect boarding house" is situated a quarter of a mile beyond
"Whittaker's Hill," nearly opposite the Salters homestead. The
sign, hung on the pole by the front gate, reads, "Bayport Hotel.
Bailey Bangs, Proprietor," but no one except the stranger in
Bayport accepts that sign seriously. When, owing to an unexpected
change in the administration at Washington, Mr. Bangs was obliged
to relinquish his position as our village postmaster, his wife came
to the rescue with the proposal that they open a boarding house.
"'Whatsoe'er you find to do,' quoted Keturah at sewing-circle
meeting, 'do it then with all your might!' That's a good Sabbath-
school hymn tune and it's good sense besides. I intend to make it
my life work to run just as complete a--a eatin' and lodgin'
establishment as I can. If, when I'm laid to rest, they can put
onto my gravestone, 'She run the perfect boardin' house,' I'LL be
satisfied."

This remark, and subsequent similar declarations, were widely
quoted, and, therefore, though casual visitors may refer to the
"Bayport Hotel," to us natives the Bangs residence is always
"Keturah's perfect boarding house." As for the sign's affirmation
of Mr. Bangs proprietorship, that is considered the cream of the
joke. The idea of meek, bald-headed little Bailey posing as
proprietor of anything while his wife is on deck, tickles Bayport's
sense of humor.

The perspiring delinquents panted into the yard of the perfect
boarding house and tremblingly opened the door leading to the
dining room. Dinner was well under way, and Mrs. Bangs, enthroned
at the end of the long table, behind the silver-plated teapot, was
waiting to receive them. The silence was appalling.

"Sorry to be a little behindhand, Ketury," stammered Asaph hurriedly.
"Town affairs are important, of course, and can't be neglected. I--"

"Yes, yes; that's so, Ketury," cut in Mr. Bangs.

"You see--"

"Hum! Yes, I see." Keturah's tone was several degrees below
freezing. "Hum! I s'pose 'twas town affairs kept you, too, hey?"

"Well, well--er--not exactly, as you might say, but--" Bailey
squeezed himself into the armchair at the end of the table opposite
his wife, the end which, with sarcasm not the less keen for being
unintentional, was called the "head." "Not exactly town affairs,
'twan't that kept me, Ketury, but--My! don't them cod cheeks smell
good? You always could cook cod cheeks, if I do say it."

The compliment was wasted. Mrs. Bangs had a sermon to deliver, and
its text was not "cod cheeks."

"Bailey Bangs," she began, "when I was brought to realize that my
husband, although apparently an able-bodied man, couldn't support
me as I'd been used to be supported, and when I was forced to
support HIM by keepin' boarders, I says, 'If there's one thing that
my house shall stand for it's punctual promptness at meal times. I
say nothing,' I says, 'about the inconvenience of gettin' on with
only one hired help when we ought to have three. If Providence, in
its unscrutable wisdom,' I says, 'has seen fit to lay this burden
onto me, the burden of a household of boarders and a husband whom--'"

And just then the power referred to by Mrs. Bangs intervened to
spare her husband the remainder of the preachment. From the
driveway of the yard, beside the dining-room windows, came the
rattle of wheels and the tramp of a horse's feet. Mrs. Matilda
Tripp, who sat nearest the windows, on that side, rose and peered
out.

"It's the depot wagon, Ketury," she said. "There's somebody inside
it. I wonder if they're comin' here."

"Transients" were almost unknown quantities at the Bayport Hotel
in May. Consequently, all the boarders and the landlady herself
crowded to the windows. The "depot wagon" had drawn up by the
steps, and Gabe Lumley, the driver, had descended from his seat and
was doing his best to open the door of the ancient vehicle. It
stuck, of course; the doors of all depot wagons stick.

"Hold on a shake!" commanded some one inside the carriage. "Wait
till I get a purchase on her. Now, then! All hands to the ropes!
Heave--ho! THERE she comes!"

The door flew back with a bang. A man sprang out upon the lower
step of the porch. The eye of every inmate of the perfect boarding
house was on him. Even the "hired help" peered from the kitchen
door.

"He's a stranger," whispered Mrs. Tripp. "I never see him before,
did you, Mr. Tidditt?"

The town clerk did not answer. He was staring at the depot wagon's
passenger, staring with a face the interested expression of which
was changing to that of surprise and amazed incredulity. Mrs.
Tripp turned to Mr. Bangs; he also was staring, open-mouthed.

"Godfrey scissors!" gasped Asaph, under his breath. "Godfrey--
SCISSORS! Bailey, I--I believe--I swan to man, I believe--"

"Ase Tidditt!" exclaimed Mr. Bangs, "am I goin' looney, or is that--
is that--"

Neither finished his sentence. There are times when language seems 
so pitifully inadequate.